---
title: How to use kexec for fast reboot/crashdump.
---

## What is `kexec`?

`kexec` is a [system call](https://linux.die.net/man/8/kexec)
that allows user to load a kernel into the memory, and boot
directly from it, without time-consuming bootloading.

This is useful for kernel developers or other people who need
to reboot very quickly without waiting for the whole BIOS boot
process to finish. Moreover, it is also used to boot up an
"emergency kernel" upon crash (e.g., `panic()`). This
[material](https://www.kernel.org/doc/ols/2005/ols2005v1-pages-177-188.pdf)
explains this.

## Install and Config `kexec`

### Kernel Configuration

To use `kexec`, the following kernel config must be enabled.

```text
Processor type and features --->
    [*] kexec system call
    [*] kexec file based system call
```

If you need crashdump, then the following config is needed
as well.

```text
Processor type and features --->
    [*] kexec system call
    [*] kernel crash dumps
    [*] Build a relocatable kernel
Kernel hacking  --->
    [*] Kernel debugging
    Compile-time checks and compiler options --->
        [*] Compile the kernel with debug info
File systems  --->
    Pseudo filesystems  --->
        -*- /proc file system support
        [*]   /proc/kcore support
        [*]   /proc/vmcore support
```

### GRUB Configuration

One need to prepare sufficient space for `kexec` to put the
new kernel. Therefore, we need to add/modify the following line
in `/etc/default/grub`.

```config
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="crashkernel=1024M,high nokaslr"
```

The `crashkernel` might be a lower value if you have less
memory available. My PC has 32 GiB of memory, just for reference.

The `nokaslr` disables address space randomization so that,
GDB can correctly recognize debug symbols from `/proc/vmcore`.

### Installation

Use the following to install userland utilities (on Gentoo).

```bash
sudo emerge --ask --verbose sys-apps/kexec-tools
```

## Usage I: Fast Reboot

For fast reboot, the command is simple. Note that the `--initrd`
is not mandatory if you don't have one. Moreover, `--append`
might be replaced with `--reuse-cmdline` if you want to use
the same set of cmdline arguments.

```bash
kexec -l path_to_kernel_image --initrd=path_to_initrd_image \
--append=command-line-options
```

A concrete example would the following.

```bash
sudo kexec -l /boot/vmlinuz-6.1.38 --reuse-cmdline
```

With new kernel loaded, you can use the following command
to fast reboot if you're using `systemd`.

```bash
sudo systemctl kexec
```

## Usage II: Crash Dump

For crashdump, things are a far more complicated. Here
is a list of points to pay attention.

- Use `-p` instead of `-l` to load crashdump kernel.
- Remove unnecessary modules via `modprobe.blacklist=<comma-separated-list>`.
- Limit the number of CPUs by `maxcpus=1`.
- Use `irqpoll` for stable interrupt handling.

With all that, we can come up with the following command.

```bash
sudo kexec -p /boot/vmlinuz-6.1.31-gentoo --reset-vga --console-vga \ 
--command-line="root=/dev/nvme0n1p5 maxcpus=1 irqpoll quite splash loglevel=3 \
systemd.show_status=false modprobe.blacklist=iptable_nat,nvidia_drm \
,nvidia_modeset,nvidia,iwlmvm,kvm_intel,iwlwifi,fuse,efivarfs \
systemd.journald.forward_to_console=no"
```

If you're using a X-based GUI environment, I would suggest
that you use `VTx` via `Ctrl+Alt+F{1-6}` before you do something
to crash your kernel otherwise kernel will just be stuck.

> Sidenote: If you are using a display manager (e.g., lxdm)
> repeatedly respawn itself on failure. This repeated behavior
> should be disabled, since it will force the screen to constantly
> switch back to VT1.
> For `systemd`, just comment out `Restart=Always` to prevent this.
